SPEC 14 (#1)
agriyakhetarpal/scientific-python-specs: spec-0014/index.md

# <!-- Maybe Loïc Estève and Henry Schreiner too? Robert Hood Chatham and Gyeongjae Choi as well perhaps, they'll be reviewing this when this is public anyway and any others I missed? -->
discussion: https://discuss.scientific-python.org/notopenedyet, will link here when we make things public
# <!-- Also to keep in mind, this SPEC closes the following issues:
# https://github.com/scientific-python/summit-2024/issues/19
# and https://github.com/Quansight-Labs/czi-scientific-python-mgmt/issues/19
# and https://github.com/scientific-python/cookie/issues/157 -->
is-draft: true
endorsed-by:
# TODO: ask for formal approval from these projects that adopted interactive docs after SPEC review
  - scikit-learn
  - scipy
  - numpy
  - scikit-image # soon
# SymPy is not among the ore projects but has been in the discussion to be included – it needs approval from SymPy's side. see https://discuss.scientific-python.org/t/spec-0-include-sympy/975
  - pywavelets # not a core project but the first one to get it done so it serves as an inspiration
  - sympy # soon
  - pandas # soon
  - statsmodels # soon
---

## Description

<!--
Briefly and clearly describe the recommendation.
-->

> A common pain point for new users coming to Scientific Python projects—particularly projects containing compiled code—has been their difficulty of installation, with historic package management troubles arising as a by-product of Python's strong capabilities for wrapping low-level languages such as C, C++, Fortran, and Rust. While the situation has improved with enhancements across the Python package management ecosystem, setting up a working Python environment can still be quite difficult for beginners. Even for experienced Python programmers, it can take a nontrivial amount of time to correctly install an unfamiliar package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A comon barrier for beginners trying to get started with Scientific Python projects is difficulty of installation. Even for experienced Python programmers, it can take a nontrivial amount of time to correctly install an unfamiliar package.
```

I think it helps with flow if this is more concise. The point about packages being difficult to install due to the presence of extension code in compiled languages probably makes more sense to mention closer to the description of the difficulties it can cause for web assembly compatibility.

Author: Thanks!

> The point about packages being difficult to install due to the presence of extension code in compiled languages probably makes more sense to mention closer to the description of the difficulties it can cause for web assembly compatibility.

I think that it should be moved somewhere else too, though I think I would like to discuss this more as the section "1.1. How to assess compatibility with WebAssembly" has been describing the differences of the WebAssembly environment at runtime, and not at installation time. Installing packages in a WebAssembly environment is much easier: the emscripten-forge channel ensures guaranteed solves, Pyodide ships only wheels and not sdists, and installing when in the browser is semi-automatic. Given that all compilation troubles for projects that contain extension modules come when installing from source, that doesn't happen with the Pyodide distribution. I've accepted the above suggestion but l omit this point for now – could you please clarify?

> In-browser interactive documentation offers users a chance to try out and explore projects without taking effort to install them locally. Even when users are able to install projects, interactive documentation provides a more immersive experience than copying and pasting code snippets into a local REPL, IDE/editor or Notebook. It can thus offer benefits for beginners and more experienced programmers alike.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In-browser interactive documentation offers users a chance to try out and explore projects without taking effort to install them locally. Even when users are able to install projects, interactive documentation provides a smoother experience than copying and pasting code snippets into a local REPL, IDE/editor or Notebook. It can thus offer benefits for beginners and more experienced programmers alike.
```

I don't think immersive is the right word here. The benefit is reducing friction not helping users get more absorbed in the documentation.

> 

Reviewer: I think it would be good to have a bridge paragraph here, after the paragraph on line 42, clearly and concretely describing what the interactive documentation we're proposing looks like, without getting into technical details and without attempting to write in a very precise legalistic way; so readers can get in their minds what we're proposing right away.

Reviewer 2: Agreed. Perhaps it is useful to insert a screenshot of an Examples section with the button and the inline notebook? A picture is worth a 1000 words here probably.

Author: I added two screenshots via d055d56bbf37f39f728ef565aa86e1c4d10cae1e, one with the button as is and another when it's opened.

This SPEC offers a primer on how Core Projects in the Scientific Python ecosystem can make their documentation interactive. It primarily focuses on Sphinx-based, HTML documentation workflows for projects with a Python API; however, recommendations are also made for other forms of documentation tooling.

### Core Project Endorsement

<!--
Discuss what it means for a core project to endorse this SPEC.
-->

Core projects endorsing this SPEC would mean that they:

> - enable interactivity within applicable sections of their documentation websites through interfaces described herewith; and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- enable interactivity within applicable sections of their documentation websites through interfaces described in this document; and
```

Let's try not to use legalese in a non-legal document. I read through all of the other SPECs and they all seem to be written in a more informal style.

Also, I realized that from "through interfaces described in this document", it's not clear to me whether this means, through the specific tooling described in this document, or through any tooling which provides the same interactive documentation interface to users. If the latter, then technically a project which provides the same interface but has Python running server side would still be conforming.

Is the SPEC asking for coordination on the specifics of how the interactive documentation is implemented? Does one have to follow all recommendations to endorse the SPEC?

Going further. I think it would be good to have a better transition from.

1. The why of interactive documentation
2. The what of interactive documentation
3. The recommended how of interactive documentation

Right now, the introduction trys to answer why, and then the document immediately dives into technical details, which may be jarring for readers lacking the context we have. If the what is explained before this section on what it means to endorse the SPEC, then we can just concretely say what it means to endorse the SPEC here, rather than leaving it open to the readers interpretation of what is "described herewith". A good bridge paragraph like I suggested above could help.

Author: > Let's try not to use legalese in a non-legal document. I read through all of the other SPECs and they all seem to be written in a more informal style.

Makes sense to me, thanks!

> Also, I realized that from "through interfaces described in this document", it's not clear to me whether this means, through the specific tooling described in this document, or through any tooling which provides the same interactive documentation interface to users. If the latter, then technically a project which provides the same interface but has Python running server side would still be conforming.
> 
> Is the SPEC asking for coordination on the specifics of how the interactive documentation is implemented? Does one have to follow all recommendations to endorse the SPEC?

Yes, in my opinion, the SPEC is asking for coordination on implementing interactive documentation, to whatever extent is possible. The specifics of the implementation are quite subjective and are vastly different based on the projects' needs, so it is difficult to coordinate them as such.

One aspect where I think all projects should agree on is to use their WebAssembly distributions for this goal, as this is the crux of our recommendation(s). Server-side Python deployments for documentation such as Thebe and Binder exist but we haven't suggested using them in any case. We should be fine if projects want to do so on their own, but as this wasn't listed in the executive summary of the CZI grant, I feel we should skip mentioning it altogether instead of briefly mentioning it.

I'll simplify the "interfaces" aspect to be more clear on what we're recommending, or proceed with your bridge paragraph idea and see if it fits.

> 
> Going further. I think it would be good to have a better transition from.
> 
> 1. The why of interactive documentation
> 2. The what of interactive documentation
> 3. The recommended how of interactive documentation
> 
> Right now, the introduction trys to answer why, and then the document immediately dives into technical details, which may be jarring for readers lacking the context we have. If the what is explained before this section on what it means to endorse the SPEC, then we can just concretely say what it means to endorse the SPEC here, rather than leaving it open to the readers interpretation of what is "described herewith". A good bridge paragraph like I suggested above could help.

Got it!

- further encourage other Scientific Python projects to adopt similar interfaces.

### Ecosystem Adoption

<!--
Discuss what it means for a project to adopt this SPEC.
-->

<!--  Intentionally left blank for now -->

#### Badges

Projects can highlight their adoption of this SPEC by including a SPEC badge.

{{< spec_badge number="14" title="Interactive Documentation" >}}

To indicate adoption of multiple SPECS with one badge, see [this](../purpose-and-process/#badges).

## Implementation

<!--
Discuss how this would be implemented.
Explain the general need and the advantages of this specific recommendation.
If relevant, include examples of how the new functionality would be used,
intended use-cases, and pseudo-code illustrating its use.
-->

### Assumptions

We assume that:

- The target project has a hosted documentation website served over static HTML, built with the Sphinx documentation framework.
- Compatibility:

>   - For compiled projects: WebAssembly binaries for the target project and its dependencies are available with either the [Pyodide](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/packages-in-pyodide.html) or [emscripten-forge](https://emscripten-forge.org/) distributions, or can be made available with a reasonable amount of effort if not yet available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - For projects with compiled extensions: WebAssembly binaries for the target project and its dependencies are available with either the [Pyodide](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/packages-in-pyodide.html) or [emscripten-forge](https://emscripten-forge.org/) distributions, or can be made available with a reasonable amount of effort if not yet available.
```

  - For pure Python projects: their dependencies—if any—are [compatible with WebAssembly](#11-how-to-assess-compatibility-with-webassembly) and are [available with either Pyodide or emscripten-forge](#12-what-does-adding-support-for-webassembly-look-like).

<hr>

With these assumptions in mind, we can now make recommendations for how to set up and deploy interactive HTML documentation.

### Recommendations

> This SPEC document makes the following recommendations, in order:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This SPEC document makes the following recommendations:
```

1. [Support the WebAssembly platform by adding a CI job](#1-support-the-webassembly-platform-by-adding-a-pyodide-ci-job)
   1.1. [How to assess compatibility with WebAssembly](#11-how-to-assess-compatibility-with-webassembly)
   1.2. [What does adding support for WebAssembly look like?](#12-what-does-adding-support-for-webassembly-look-like)
2. [Enabling WASM builds for use in interactive documentation](#2-enabling-wasm-builds-for-use-in-interactive-documentation)
3. [Enabling interactive documentation deployments](#3-enabling-interactive-documentation-deployments)
   3.1. [Configuration](#31-configuration)

#### 1. Support the WebAssembly platform by adding a Pyodide CI job

{{< admonition note >}}

> While this step is not required for enabling interactive documentation deployments alone, it is recommended to ensure that they work properly and ease their maintenance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While this step is not required for enabling interactive documentation deployments alone, it is recommended to ensure that they work properly and make maintenance easier.
```

  - statsmodels # soon
---

## Description

<!--
Briefly and clearly describe the recommendation.
-->

A comon barrier for beginners trying to get started with Scientific Python projects is difficulty of installation. Even for experienced Python programmers, it can take a nontrivial amount of time to correctly install an unfamiliar package.

In-browser interactive documentation offers users a chance to try out and explore projects without taking effort to install them locally. Even when users are able to install projects, interactive documentation provides a smoother experience than copying and pasting code snippets into a local REPL, IDE/editor or Notebook. It can thus offer benefits for beginners and more experienced programmers alike.

The [JupyterLite](https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) project coupled with either the [Pyodide](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/) or the [emscripten-forge](https://emscripten-forge.org/) distributions enables running Python code execution in the browser via [WebAssembly](https://webassembly.org/), such as code snippets in API examples, and/or narrative (long-form) documentation such as notebooks, tutorials, and how-to guides.

> 

Reviewer: I don't think the second paragraph needs to go into technical details like the distinction between Pyodide and emscripten-forge.   It's good that you mention API examples, and narrative long-form documentation, but you still haven't actually explained what interactivity for these looks like in plain terms. This is  an introductory paragraph, and I think the goal should be to help the reader to understand at once what is being recommended in terms of what user's experience, independent of the technical details behind delivering it.

Author: I think the screenshot added will resolve this, per Ralf's comment below in the review?

> This SPEC offers a primer on how Core Projects in the Scientific Python ecosystem can make their documentation interactive through these projects. It primarily focuses on Sphinx-based, HTML documentation workflows for projects with a Python API; however, recommendations are also made for other forms of documentation tooling.

Reviewer: If  details of particular projects are left out in paragraph 2, I think here in paragraph 3 would be a good place to bring them up. 

"This SPEC offers a primer on how Core Projects in Scientific Python ecosystem the can make their documentation interactive through Jupyterlite together with a Webassembly based Python distribution such as Pyodide or emscripten-forge."

I'm not sure if the language I've used above is quite correct in terms of what Pyodide and emscripten-forge are, but I think there should be some general description of what Pyodide and emscripten-forge are to help keep things clear for readers. I've left links out above, I'm just trying to get the general idea across.

Reviewer: Also, the recommendations regarding other forms of tooling are very brief. I would have expected more based on the final sentence here. Making it "some brief recommendations are also made"  would help better set expectations

Author: > I'm not sure if the language I've used above is quite correct in terms of what Pyodide and emscripten-forge are, but I think there should be some general description of what Pyodide and emscripten-forge are to help keep things clear for readers.

I think your sentence is mostly correct – I've used it as-is but changed it just a tad bit in f86eecc43768d73a67169c86c9aa1064379cde59 to highlight the difference that Pyodide and emscripten-forge are more than Python distributions, considering the fact that Pyodide is a runtime that offers a Python distribution and emscripten-forge operates on the system level and offers more languages/packages/kernels beyond just those for Python.

### Core Project Endorsement

<!--
Discuss what it means for a core project to endorse this SPEC.
-->

Core projects endorsing this SPEC would mean that they:

- enable interactivity within applicable sections of their documentation websites through interfaces described in this document; and

> - further encourage other Scientific Python projects to adopt similar interfaces to make their documentation interactive.

Reviewer: I still think it would be good to make the bridge paragraph sufficiently clear that we could refer to it when describing what it means to endorse the SPEC, rather than referring the reader to the entire document. 

I think the clearest way to structure this, that would ease the cognitive burden for readers, is to have a clear description of what needs to be accomplished to endorse the SPEC, and for the rest of the document to give suggestions and technical advice on how to accomplish these things. As it stands, "the interfaces described in this document" is ambiguous, and it is not clear from this phrase what details in the document are essential to endorsing this SPEC and which are incidental.

Author: I hope 8d2153b19a2a5ee6e30d8ebf5f335aed6c101680 can address this? I've tried to expand the section without making any technical statements within it.

    <br>
    1.1. [How to assess compatibility with WebAssembly](#11-how-to-assess-compatibility-with-webassembly)
    <br>
    1.2. [What does adding support for WebAssembly look like?](#12-what-does-adding-support-for-webassembly-look-like)
2. [Enabling WASM builds for use in interactive documentation](#2-enabling-wasm-builds-for-use-in-interactive-documentation)
3. [Enabling interactive documentation deployments](#3-enabling-interactive-documentation-deployments)
    <br>
    3.1. [Configuration](#31-configuration)

#### 1. Support the WebAssembly platform by adding a Pyodide CI job

{{< admonition note >}}
While this step is not required for enabling interactive documentation deployments alone, it is recommended to ensure that projects work in the WebAssembly environment used for such deployments properly and make their maintenance easier. We recommend that both pure Python projects and projects with compiled extensions do this.

{{< /admonition >}}

##### 1.1. How to assess compatibility with WebAssembly

First, we discuss assessing whether a project is compatible with WebAssembly.

> While we note that Core Projects will need to keep the below points in mind when aiming to establish compatibility with WebAssembly, [most of them are already available in the Pyodide distribution](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/packages-in-pyodide.html), thanks to the pioneering work collectively done by the Pyodide maintainers, the emscripten-forge team, and several external collaborators.

Reviewer: 1. This reads as kind of self-congratulatory coming from a Pyodide maintainer. Maybe tone the language down a bit?
2. From context, I think this is saying most projects are already available in the Pyodide distribution, but grammatically it reads to me like it's saying the below points are already available in the Pyodide distribution.  I think the problem stems from the use of "Core Projects" to refer first to the decision making collective agent behind the project and second to the packages themselves which can be included in Pyodide, and using "most of them" in a way that equates the former with the later. Consider rephrasing.

Author: Re. 1: I feel that cutting down the word "pioneering" from this sentence addresses this, unless you feel otherwise?
Re. 2: fair point, I understand that this can be a point of confusion!

Author: I added these in 26299de29c26875059b7ee3e73bb4d82a678ce0a, please feel free to take a look!

We consider a project well-tested if there exists a CI job, which:

- builds the source code for the project:
    - for projects with compiled extensions: using the Emscripten compiler toolchain for the `wasm32-unknown-emscripten` target into Pyodide-tagged wheels,
    - for pure Python projects: building wheels through existing build frontends such as `pip` or `pypa/build`
- subsequently, runs the entire test suite or applicable portions with these wheels installed into a Pyodide virtual environment provided with `pyodide venv`

- Additionally, this SPEC recommends that [project contacts](https://github.com/pyodide/pyodide/issues/4506) volunteer as recipe maintainers for the packages they maintain, so that they can provide help with builds or testing issues that may arise when the Pyodide or emscripten-forge maintainers try to upgrade packages, or with usage issues that may arise when users try to use Pyodide or emscripten-forge.

> #### 2. Enabling WASM builds for use in interactive documentation

Reviewer: I find this entire section hard to understand. There seem to be a lot of technical details that aren't really relevant to the general idea. If we're not making specific recommendations on which distribution to choose based on these details, I see no need in bringing them all up. We could just ask readers to refer to the documentation of each and make their own decision. 

If there is any additional information not in the documentation for Pyodide or emscripten-forge that could be immediately helpful for users looking to add packages, I think that would be useful in this section.

Author: This section refers to out-of-tree support (in CI), as opposed to in-tree support (a recipe for a specific version) where the latter doesn't guarantee proper compatibility. I think it builds up well as a prerequisite to enabling interactive docs. While sections 1.1 and 1.2 talk about separate things, do you think we should merge them together?

Reviewer: What I'm mostly concerned about is adding on details without making it clear why the details are being brought up, and without having fenceposts that show what are the essential points that package maintainers need to know to enable and deploy interactive documentation, and what points are asides and background information.

We don't want to make things appear more complicated than they are, so I think it's best to bring up details as needed, and explain why they are needed. We do want to talk about adding packages to Pyodide and emscripten-forge here, but this could be expressed concisely, without burying the reader in detail.

Author: On second thought and on re-reading this section a few times in my head, I think I'm convinced that asking projects' maintainers to become recipe maintainers to best moved to section 2 entirely: it is only when a maintainer will add an in-tree recipe for a package and thus enable the distribution of its WASM build that they will also consider signing up as a recipe maintainer — not when implementing out-of-tree builds which are purely for the confidence that a package will work well when distributed in-tree.

I'll shorten this sentence and move it there, and hopefully it will look and read better.

- It is possible to use the distribution only through the JupyterLite project, unlike Pyodide, which also supports Node.js
- The versions of Emscripten used across both are different, and therefore the ABI is, too
- It uses `conda`-based packaging standards and file formats, rather than that for PyPI that Pyodide uses (wheels).

Therefore, if a project and its dependencies are compatible with WebAssembly as noted above, but may not yet be available via Pyodide or emscripten-forge, it is possible to add them to these distributions. This process is described in their respective documentation websites:

1. https://pyodide.org/en/stable/development/new-packages.html
2. https://emscripten-forge.org/development/adding_packages/

#### 3. Enabling interactive documentation deployments

Once WebAssembly binaries for a project and its dependencies are available through Pyodide and/or emscripten-forge, the project may start using them as a part of interactive documentation deployments.

> Our recommended tool of choice for interactive documentation deployments for Sphinx-based websites is [the JupyterLite project](https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io/en/stable/). The rationale behind this recommendation is that it provides multiple features and surrounding tooling to ease such deployments.

Reviewer: 1. I think you can either say "recommended tool" or "tool of choice". "recommended tool of choice" sounds a little redundant. But I think just directly saying "We recommend the Jupyterlite project for interactive documentation deployments for for Sphinx-based websites" is best.

- Two browser-based Python kernels, `jupyterlite-pyodide-kernel` and `jupyterlite-xeus`: these ship with support for the Pyodide and the emscripten-forge distributions respectively, and need to be installed alongside `jupyterlite-sphinx`. Documentation website owners may choose between either of the two kernels, with the differences between them noted as a part of the JupyterLite documentation: https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io/en/stable/howto/configure/kernels.html#adding-a-python-kernel

We recommend installing and configuring [the `jupyterlite-sphinx` project](https://jupyterlite-sphinx.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) and one of the two kernels within Core Projects’ Sphinx-based documentation workflows in order to build a JupyterLite deployment and interact with it through Sphinx.

##### 3.1 Configuration

Next, we discuss how to configure JupyterLite, jupyterlite-sphinx, and the installed kernel(s) of choice together.

We have observed that documentation for Scientific Python projects typically comes in two forms:

- API reference documentation, and
- narrative long-form content

> For both of these, we have different approaches to enable interactivity:

Reviewer: Should this be "We have different approaches to enable interactivity", or "We recommend different approaches to enable interactivity"?

Author: It should be the latter. Thanks for the catch!

###### API documentation

> `jupyterlite-sphinx` offers the [`try_examples` directive](https://jupyterlite-sphinx.readthedocs.io/en/stable/directives/try_examples.html), which can make "Examples" sections within API documentation interactive, adding buttons which swap the rendered code snippets in-place with an interactive mini-notebook. There is an option to have the directives inserted into "Examples" sections automatically for documentation that uses [Numpydoc](https://numpydoc.readthedocs.io/), and with [`sphinx.ext.napoleon`](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/napoleon.html) supported on a best-effort basis. The look, shape, feel, text, and inclusion of these buttons across the documentation can be configured through user-defined options.

Reviewer: This reads like advertising copy for `jupyterlite-sphinx`. Going back to the "we have" vs "we recommend" distinction from my preceding comment: Are we writing this as the authors of the relevant parts of `jupyterlite-sphinx` trying to get the ecosystem to standardize around our package, or as neutral members of the community trying to help the ecosystem come to a good decision regarding interactive docs tooling? Deserved or not, I think sounding too much like we are just trying to sell everyone on our own tool could rankle some people. After all, we were thinking about the best tooling for interactive docs first, and this lead us to work on `jupyterlite-sphinx`.

I'd be curious to see what @rgommers thinks though. I don't think major revisions are needed or anything like that, I just think it's important to pay attention to tone.

Reviewer 2: I agree with the tone comments elsewhere, however this particular paragraph seems fine. I think `jupyterlite-sphinx` is the only game in town right now for API docs, so it seems fine. I also don't see it as "our tool", mostly the tool we started contributing to after considering our options.

Author: Thanks, both. Considering that the only other (relatively mature) tool for interactive docs that I know of is marimo and they don't yet have a Sphinx extension to do what we're doing, `jupyterlite-sphinx` is the only project that would come up in a requirement like this. The likely promotional tone does come from the aspect that we contributed significantly to the project. However, the SPEC's recommendations here are broad and thus will always be merely guidelines. Projects are free to deviate from the recommendations if they find something else suits them better – the idea is still to get interactive docs rolling for projects, not them rolling through our specific tool (as we discussed elsewhere that I can't remember where).

I'll resolve this comment for now, and if someone objects in the public review, we can revisit the language here.

---

Once interactive documentation has been configured and deployed, the ["Updating package and kernel versions for Pyodide-powered or emscripten-forge-powered websites"](#Updating-package-and-kernel-versions-for-Pyodide-powered-or-emscripten-forge-powered-websites) section contains information on how to increment the versions of the packages and the distribution/kernel used.

#### What distribution should projects choose: Pyodide or emscripten-forge?

<!-- I have not had a better answer to this beyond "it depends" so I don't know how to end this section even though I have known to start it -->

The Pyodide and emscripten-forge ecosystems are both great choices. Pyodide must be used with the `jupyterlite-pyodide-kernel` project, and the emscripten-forge distribution is available through the Xeus kernel.

> While we have noted the difference between both kernels, the key difference is that the Pyodide kernel, at the moment, allows one to dynamically install packages with a `%pip install` magic through [`piplite`](https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io/en/stable/howto/pyodide/packages.html#installing-packages-at-runtime), a package that provides abstractions over `micropip`, while the Xeus kernel does not as it lacks an in-browser package manager ([`picomamba`](https://github.com/mamba-org/picomamba) may soon address this). An environment file has to be used with the Xeus kernel, which pre-installs packages at the time of building the documentation.

Reviewer: What do you mean by "noted the difference between both kernels". Reading back, I see this:

"Documentation website owners may choose between either of the two kernels, with the differences between them noted as a part of the JupyterLite documentation: https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io/en/stable/howto/configure/kernels.html#adding-a-python-kernel"

It seems to as if the differences are noted at this website, not in the SPEC. Consider rephrasing.

Author: Yes, I think this was a remnant of the time when I had listed some brief points that noted the difference and later replaced them with the link. "The key difference" point still seems legible, so I'll remove this phrase and keep this conversation unresolved. I've changed the wording in 9ed1a4b67049ddd0177e45084710ec2f8030b6bd.

See [the JupyterLite documentation on "Adding a Python kernel"](https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io/en/stable/howto/configure/kernels.html#adding-a-python-kernel) for more.

### Runtime considerations

> During the process, it is necessary for us to discuss common aspects and scenarios that should be kept in mind when enabling interactive documentation deployments.

Reviewer: This reads like filler text to me. I'm not sure what it contributes.

Author: 🤔 Yes, I think the trouble here is that "Runtime considerations" is not descriptive enough to me of what has been said in the sub-sections below, hence this sentence. The idea is that this section essentially contains a bunch of "Frequently Asked Questions", but I don't want to use such a heading for it – it feels odd. This sentence is filler text indeed but I'm looking for a smoother way to remove it.

## Suggestions on other documentation tooling

While this SPEC provides recommendations on integration with Sphinx; we also offer suggestions for other documentation development tooling as well:

1. [MkDocs](https://www.mkdocs.org/) does not currently have a JupyterLite plugin that provides functionality equivalent to `jupyterlite-sphinx`. However, there are some ways through which interactive documentation deployments can somewhat be achieved:
   - Projects like https://github.com/samuelcolvin/mkdocs-run-code and https://github.com/JeffersGlass/mkdocs-pyscript provide integrations to embed interactive components.
   - As a JupyterLite site contains static assets and HTML files, it can be bundled and served alongside an MkDocs-based documentation website, with both separate from each other.
2. [The MyST-JS project](https://js.mystmd.org/) also provides configuration to integrate with Pyodide and JupyterLite: https://mystmd.org/guide/integrating-jupyter#id-case-using-pyodide-jupyterlite

## Acknowledgements

> We express our gratitude towards the grant [CZI 2022-316713](czi-scientific-python-grant-2022)

Reviewer: The tone seems out of place for these acknowledgementst I also think it's a little unusal to acknowledge specific projects and not the people responsible for them, especially when the author list includes maintainers of some of these projects.

My understanding is that in this SPEC, we should be taking a neutral point of view, trying to recommend best practices for interactive documentation. In a lot of places it reads more like an advertisement for these particular projects, and readers might interpret acknowledgements expressed this way as blithe disregard for potential conflicts of interest. Similarly I think for the way the funding acknowledgement is stated. 

In reality though, we only chose to recommend and some of us became involved with these particular projects as a result of research into what the best practices should be for interactive documentation, so there is not so much conflict of interest as it may appear. I still think its good to avoid phrasing that may be viewed suspiciously.

Maybe something like:

"Work on investigating best practices for interactive documentation for Scientific Python projects, improving tooling for interactive documentation, and developing and documenting workflows was supported by CZI grant 2022-316713."

I'm curious what @rgommers thinks though.

Reviewer 2: Yes, the rephrase seems better here.

Author: It makes a lot of sense to me. Reworded as per your suggestion, Albert.

However, I think my aim here was to also be a little appreciative of these external collaborators (Scientific Python folks, Pyodide maintainers besides me, and emscripten-forge maintainers) who were not remunerated as a part of the CZI grant but their work was pretty consequential for ours. Is there still a way to do so with the rewording?

As you've mentioned that it's unusual not to acknowledge the people responsible for these projects – I think we could always add them as co-authors to the SPEC, but I still feel it would be great to figure out a better way?

---

{{< figure >}}

src = "./NumPy-interactive-example.png"
alt = "The image shows the NumPy documentation page for the numpy.hsplit function. At the top is the NumPy logo and navigation bar with links to the User Guide, API reference, and other documentation sections. The left sidebar contains a list of related NumPy array manipulation functions. The main content focuses on the numpy.hsplit function, which splits an array into multiple sub-arrays horizontally (column-wise). The function signature shows numpy.hsplit(ary, indices_or_sections). The documentation explains that hsplit is equivalent to split with axis=1, and for 1-D arrays, it splits at axis=0. Prominently featured here is a detailed interactive example showing how to use numpy.hsplit in a numpydoc-based Examples section. A blue 'Try it in your browser!' button above the code snippet and below the Examples heading that allows users to run the code in a JupyterLite kernel directly within the documentation page without leaving the site. The example demonstrates splitting a 4x4 array into two parts and how to use hsplit with specific indices."

> caption = "A screenshot of an interactive example in the NumPy documentation. The blue button allows users to run the code in a JupyterLite kernel directly within the documentation page without leaving the site."

Reviewer 3: nit: do not rely on color

```suggestion
caption = "A screenshot of an interactive example in the NumPy documentation. The blue button labeled 'Try it in your browser!' allows users to run the code in a JupyterLite kernel directly within the documentation page without leaving the site."
```

caption = "The interactive JupyterLite notebook that has been opened and executed after clicking the 'Try it in your browser!' button from the NumPy hsplit documentation. The notebook is running directly within the same documentation page in an iframe, allowing users to experiment with the function without leaving the documentation."
title = "Running the interactive example within the documentation page"

{{< /figure >}}

### Core Project Endorsement

<!--
Discuss what it means for a core project to endorse this SPEC.
-->

Core projects endorsing this SPEC would mean that they:

> 1. enable interactivity within applicable sections of their documentation websites, such as

Reviewer 3: Sorry I have a high-level question: does endorsing mean they will implement interactivity, or that they agree this is the best way to enable interactivity? I thought it would be the second but I may have understood endorsements wrong.

I would expect the "Adoption" to mean that the project will actually implement these suggestions.

Author: Interesting – I didn't think of the difference between "Adoption" and "Endorsement" this way, as I had left the "Ecosystem Adoption" section blank like most of the previous SPECs had done so.  The "lazy loading" SPEC has a non-empty one, which helps.

I also left a comment on a similar note slightly above in the reviews, adding it here for ease of access: https://github.com/agriyakhetarpal/scientific-python-specs/pull/1#discussion_r2052280065, which I now feel applies to "Adoption" instead of "Endorsement".

Hence, in this case, I think endorsing should mean the former – that they will implement interactivity, as for the latter, such an agreement would be way too difficult to come to, I feel.

In the context of a SPEC, I think "to endorse" means "to support, agree with the general idea, and allow it to be accepted/studied/scrutinised/improved, etc.", and "to adopt" means "to accept, to follow the principles of, etc."

So, a "Core Project Endorsement" endorsement by Core Projects here could be that they will implement interactivity like we've suggested, and "Ecosystem Adoption" will involve more of the aftermath around the SPEC when a few projects in the ecosystem have endorsed it, and how. Hence, perhaps it makes sense to make the "Endorsement" section shorter and less technical, and adapt the current points to the "Adoption" section?

Reviewer 3: I'm thinking around e.g. this, from SPEC 0: "Core project endorsing this SPEC means that those projects encourage all projects across the Scientific Python ecosystem to limit how long they support older Python versions and older dependency versions. A core project endorsing this SPEC does not imply that that project will provide bug-fix releases for two full years after a release."

So I would say:

- Core projects endorsing this SPEC means that those projects encourage projects to adopt this approach if they are interested in implementing interactive docs
- Core projects endorsing this SPEC does not mean the project itself will implement interactive docs; but if they do, they will follow these recommendations
- Core project adoption/Ecosystem adoption describes how a project will specifically implement this approach.

I can be wrong though, so I wouldn't spend too much time on this section and maybe wait to get more feedback on a public PR.

- The bitness is 32-bit, with 64-bit memory indices left for future iterations of the WebAssembly specification
- CPython is directly compiled to WASM, specifically, the `wasm32-unknown-emscripten` target triplet, and the Python virtual machine that runs Python programs itself runs inside browsers' WebAssembly virtual machine implementations. While the Emscripten compiler toolchain provides JavaScript glue code that integrates with web-based elements in browsers, POSIX standard compliance—while generally high—is implemented differently due to browsers' file system and memory sandboxing features.
- This means that specific modules from the Python standard library are unavailable and have been removed, and there is a lack of support for the `threading` and `multiprocessing` modules. Core Projects relying on parallel programming functionality, for example, using pthreads or OpenMP must adapt their code accordingly.

For more details, refer to [the Pyodide documentation on "Pyodide Python compatibility"](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/wasm-constraints.html).

> 

Reviewer 3: Here's a suggestion, take it or leave it:

```suggestion
Two major projects are currently providing ports of CPython to a WebAssembly runtime through the Emscripten compiler toolchain: Pyodide and emscripten-forge. They are largely compatible with CPython similar to how it runs on a standard Linux machine, albeit with a few differences, limitations, and exceptions.

[Most Core Projects are already available in the Pyodide distribution](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/packages-in-pyodide.html), thanks to the work collectively done by the Pyodide maintainers, the emscripten-forge team, and several external collaborators.

Consider the following when assessing compatibility with WebAssembly:
- The bitness is 32-bit, with 64-bit memory indices left for future iterations of the WebAssembly specification
- CPython is directly compiled to WASM, specifically, the `wasm32-unknown-emscripten` target triplet, and the Python virtual machine that runs Python programs itself runs inside browsers' WebAssembly virtual machine implementations. While the Emscripten compiler toolchain provides JavaScript glue code that integrates with web-based elements in browsers, POSIX standard compliance—while generally high—is implemented differently due to browsers' file system and memory sandboxing features.

This means that specific modules from the Python standard library are unavailable and have been removed, and there is a lack of support for the `threading` and `multiprocessing` modules. Projects relying on parallel programming functionality, for example, using pthreads or OpenMP must adapt their code accordingly.

For more details, refer to [the Pyodide documentation on "Pyodide Python compatibility"](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/wasm-constraints.html).

```

##### 1.2. What does adding support for WebAssembly look like?

> First, Core Projects should check if this criterion is satisfied already, as [many Scientific Python projects are now well-tested for usage and interoperability in a WebAssembly runtime provided by Pyodide and emscripten-forge](https://github.com/Quansight-Labs/czi-scientific-python-mgmt/issues/18). This goal's accomplishment amplifies the notion of Scientific Python being runnable in browser-based runtimes.

Reviewer 3: I think we can remove this sentence (I find it a bit hard to parse)
```suggestion
First, Core Projects should check if they are already supported, as [many Scientific Python projects are now well-tested for usage and interoperability in a WebAssembly runtime provided by Pyodide and emscripten-forge](https://github.com/Quansight-Labs/czi-scientific-python-mgmt/issues/18).
```

Author: Sounds good! A question here: should it be "if they are already supported" or "if they are not already supported"?

I think the former is making more sense, as to me the sentence is saying that Core Projects should check if they already support WebAssembly, because many projects are now well-tested for it.

i.e., we're trying to say "Check if you already have WebAssembly support, because many projects do."

Reviewer 3: Yes you are right, some of my portuguese escaped in there 😄

Author: Thanks! Updating this.

#### 2. Enabling WASM builds for use in interactive documentation

After establishing WebAssembly compatibility, the next step is to make binaries available through the appropriate pathways; i.e., through the Pyodide distribution or the emscripten-forge channel.

Pyodide provides an entire distribution of packages along with its runtime through the jsDelivr CDN as its package index. Packages are bundled as WebAssembly-tagged wheels, which can be installed with [`micropip`](https://github.com/pyodide/micropip/), Pyodide's in-browser package manager. Similarly, [the `emscripten-forge` channel](https://emscripten-forge.org/) also has a growing collection of packages that support the `wasm32-unknown-emscripten` target, often mirroring Pyodide in terms of the collection of the packages available and their versions. The distinction is that emscripten-forge uses `conda`-based packaging standards and file formats, while Pyodide builds on those for PyPI (designed around Python wheels).

We will discuss further the differences between the Pyodide and `emscripten-forge` distributions when we suggest how to choose between them later in this document.

> Once a project and its dependencies are compatible with WebAssembly as noted above, but may not yet be available via Pyodide or emscripten-forge, it is possible to add them to these distributions. This process is described in their respective documentation websites:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For a project not yet available via Pyodide or emscripten-forge, once it and its dependencies are established as compatible with WebAssembly (as discussed above), it is relatively straightforward to add it to one or both of these distributions. The process is described in their respective documentation websites:
```

The existing paragraph reads a little garbled to me. I tried to fix up the grammatical structure here. I also changed "possible" to "relatively straightforward", since it could be "possible" while still being very difficult. I used "established as compatible" because sometimes projects will already be compatible and one just needs to confirm, but in other cases, work will be needed to make them compatible, and it was the most concise way I could think of to capture both meanings.

Once a project and its dependencies are compatible with WebAssembly as noted above, but may not yet be available via Pyodide or emscripten-forge, it is possible to add them to these distributions. This process is described in their respective documentation websites:

1. https://pyodide.org/en/stable/development/new-packages.html
2. https://emscripten-forge.org/development/adding_packages/

Additionally, during this process, this SPEC recommends that [project contacts](https://github.com/pyodide/pyodide/issues/4506) volunteer as recipe maintainers for the packages they are core developers and/or maintainers of, so that they can help with builds or testing issues that may occur when the Pyodide or emscripten-forge maintainers try to upgrade packages, or with usage issues that may arise when users try to use Pyodide or emscripten-forge.

#### 3. Enabling interactive documentation deployments

Once a project's Webassembly binaries and dependencies are available through Pyodide and/or emscripten-forge, the project may start using them in interactive documentation deployments.

> We recommend [the JupyterLite project](https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) for this. The rationale behind this recommendation is that it provides multiple features and surrounding tooling to ease such deployments.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We recommend [the JupyterLite project](https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) due to its multiple features and surrounding tooling to ease such deployments.
```

- API reference documentation, and
- narrative long-form content

For both of these, we recommend different approaches to enable interactivity:

###### API documentation

`jupyterlite-sphinx` offers the [`try_examples` directive](https://jupyterlite-sphinx.readthedocs.io/en/stable/directives/try_examples.html), which can make "Examples" sections within API documentation interactive. This directive adds buttons which swap the rendered code snippets in-place with an interactive mini-notebook that can be executed without leaving the page. There is an option to have the directives inserted into "Examples" sections automatically for documentation that uses [numpydoc](https://numpydoc.readthedocs.io/), and with [`sphinx.ext.napoleon`](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/napoleon.html) supported on a best-effort basis. The look, shape, feel, text, and inclusion of these buttons across the documentation can be configured through user-defined options.

###### Narrative documentation and tutorials (long-form content)

For longer-form narrative content such as tutorials, how-to guides, and explanatory documentation:

> - `jupyterlite-sphinx` offers directives to render long-form content written in notebooks (the [`jupyterlite` directive](https://jupyterlite-sphinx.readthedocs.io/en/stable/directives/jupyterlite.html), the [`notebooklite` directive](https://jupyterlite-sphinx.readthedocs.io/en/stable/directives/notebooklite.html), and so on), which can be configured to open notebooks in new tabs or iframes within the same tab. It supports both traditional IPyNB files and MyST Markdown notebooks. Unlike the `try_examples` directive, these directives do not work with reST-based content. We recommend using MyST Markdown notebooks, as they integrate well with version control.

Reviewer 3: My experience is that MyST Markdown notebooks are really not very popular with maintainers that are not focused on docs, so it's worth pointing to a reference here.
```suggestion
- `jupyterlite-sphinx` offers directives to render long-form content written in notebooks (the [`jupyterlite` directive](https://jupyterlite-sphinx.readthedocs.io/en/stable/directives/jupyterlite.html), the [`notebooklite` directive](https://jupyterlite-sphinx.readthedocs.io/en/stable/directives/notebooklite.html), and so on), which can be configured to open notebooks in new tabs or iframes within the same tab. It supports both traditional IPyNB files and [MyST Markdown notebooks](https://myst-nb.readthedocs.io/en/stable/authoring/text-notebooks.html). Unlike the `try_examples` directive, these directives do not work with reST-based content. We recommend using MyST Markdown notebooks, as they integrate well with version control.
```

Author: Thank you! Accepting this suggestion with a small change (changing the "latest" in the link to "stable", as I've followed the same pattern in other links in the same sentence + linking to MyST-NB's docs on text-based notebooks directly so that it saves a few clicks).

- The Sphinx-Gallery project offers a [JupyterLite integration, built with `jupyterlite-sphinx`](https://sphinx-gallery.github.io/stable/configuration.html#jupyterlite) which enables a "JupyterLite" button in the secondary sidebar to open a notebook in the JupyterLite deployments. It provides a `notebook_modification_function` configuration option via `conf.py` that can be used to configure code cells or Markdown cells at the top of a notebook, with custom `%pip`-install commands, imports from other libraries, or extra admonitions.

---

Once interactive documentation has been configured and deployed, the ["Updating package and kernel versions for Pyodide-powered or emscripten-forge-powered websites"](#Updating-package-and-kernel-versions-for-Pyodide-powered-or-emscripten-forge-powered-websites) section contains information on how to increment the packages' and distribution/kernel's versions.

An end-to-end example of the above steps is also available; see [the `jupyterlite-sphinx-demo` project](#an-end-to-end-example).

> #### What distribution should projects choose: Pyodide or emscripten-forge?

Reviewer 3: I think this section needs a bit of work. In the end, it's not clear at all to me why I would choose one project over the other.

My recommendation for structure here would be to start with an outline, like:

- Pros/cons of Pyodide
- Pros/cons of emscripten-forge

Then, if you want to have more discussion that can be valuable, but it will be easier to grasp the main differences when reading.

Author: I have converted all this information into a table in a137f3e105fb80ce868a6dc31e08793b2c6c5c45 which makes things way more concise and streamlined, do you like it?

Author: Also, cc: @steppi, as you also previously expressed your concerns about this section above in your reviews; I hope the rewrite makes sense.

Reviewer 3: Looks much clearer, thank you!

<!-- I have not had a better answer to this beyond "it depends" so I don't know how to end this section even though I have known to start it -->

There are a few differences between the two distributions in terms of runtimes and packaging, and the kernels, which are worth noting:

> - Available runtimes: It is possible to use the emscripten-forge distribution only through the JupyterLite project, unlike Pyodide, which also supports Node.js and native browser-based JavaScript runtimes.

Reviewer 3: I don't think I understand this sentence. Does it mean that 
- Pyodide needs extra stuff to work, unlike emscripten-forge which works by itself with jupyterlite; 
or
- emscripten-forge only supports jupyterlite, unlike Pyodide which also supports node.js and native browser-based JS runtimes
?

Author: Yes, it means the latter, as it's a limitation on emscripten-forge's side and Pyodide's list of supported runtimes is larger.

However, now that I think of it, for a reader who is coming with no information about the topic and only wants to know more about and implement interactive documentation, I suppose the difference does not matter to them? The deployments (at least the ones based on this SPEC) will use JupyterLite anyway and not anything else, so perhaps we can drop this point?

Reviewer 3: Yes I think that makes sense. For that kind of inside knowledge they can definetely refer to the pyodide/emscripten-forge docs.

The emscripten-forge distribution does not have this limitation. Still, packages there need to be continually updated, supported, and patched in the same way they need to be for inclusion in Pyodide. This is planning to change with the upcoming [Pyodide version 0.28](https://github.com/pyodide/pyodide/issues/4918), which will allow the distribution of Pyodide’s packages outside of Pyodide's releases.

### The maintenance of interactive documentation utilities

After interactive documentation deployments are rolled out, a question arises about their maintenance. Here, we provide the following recommendations:

- projects that use the Pyodide distribution host interactive documentation deployments on an experimental and best-effort basis, built for quick prototyping and pedagogical use cases for beginners and intermediate users, and
- issues concerning interactive documentation rollouts be handled only for the "stable" and "development" versions of the documentation.

> <!-- should we recommend that? -->

Reviewer 3: If we think a recommendation is too strong, it's fair to say
```suggestion
After interactive documentation deployments are rolled out, common maintenance patterns include:

- hosting them on an experimental and best-effort basis, built for quick prototyping and pedagogical use cases for beginners and intermediate users, and
- handling issues concerning these rollouts only for the "stable" and "development" versions of the documentation.
```

Author: Makes sense to me, thanks! I think the phrase "interactive documentation" has been repeated a lot of times here, so I've just made very small edits to your review suggestion to cut that out! :)

caption = "The interactive JupyterLite notebook that has been opened and executed after clicking the 'Try it in your browser!' button from the NumPy hsplit documentation. The notebook is running directly within the same documentation page in an iframe, allowing users to experiment with the function without leaving the documentation."
title = "Running the interactive example within the documentation page"

{{< /figure >}}

### Core Project Endorsement

<!--
Discuss what it means for a core project to endorse this SPEC.
-->

Core projects endorsing this SPEC would mean that they:

1. enable interactivity within applicable sections of their documentation websites, such as
    - the API reference sections (e.g., for "Examples" sections for public API methods and classes)
    - narrative long-form content (tutorials, how-to guides, etc., that are usually written in the form of notebooks)
    - and so on
2. further encourage other Scientific Python projects to adopt similar interfaces to make their documentation websites interactive, and
3. take interactive documentation deployments into account when making decisions about the future of their documentation, and

> 4. consider the suggestions made in this SPEC when doing so, wholly or in part.

Reviewer: This is much improved.  The only thing I would question is the use of ` - and so on` as a bullet point.

Reviewer 3: Agreed - I think we can remove that, "such as" already implied this is not an exhaustive list.

Author: Eh, y'all can call this a habit of mine 😅 Removing.

### Ecosystem Adoption

<!--
Discuss what it means for a project to adopt this SPEC.
-->

<!--  Intentionally left blank for now -->

#### Badges

Projects can highlight their adoption of this SPEC by including a SPEC badge.

{{< spec_badge number="14" title="Interactive Documentation" >}}

To indicate adoption of multiple SPECS with one badge, see [this](../purpose-and-process/#badges).

## Implementation

<!--
Discuss how this would be implemented.
Explain the general need and the advantages of this specific recommendation.
If relevant, include examples of how the new functionality would be used,
intended use-cases, and pseudo-code illustrating its use.
-->

### Assumptions

> We assume that:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Assuming that:
```

- The target project has a hosted documentation website served over static HTML, built with the Sphinx documentation framework.
- Compatibility:
  - For projects with compiled extensions: WebAssembly binaries for the target project and its dependencies are available with either the [Pyodide](https://pyodide.org/en/stable/usage/packages-in-pyodide.html) or [emscripten-forge](https://emscripten-forge.org/) distributions, or can be made available with a reasonable amount of effort if not yet available.
  - For pure Python projects: their dependencies—if any—are [compatible with WebAssembly](#11-how-to-assess-compatibility-with-webassembly) and are [available with either Pyodide or emscripten-forge](#12-what-does-adding-support-for-webassembly-look-like).

> <hr>
> 

Author: ```suggestion
```

> With these assumptions in mind, we can now make recommendations for setting up and deploying interactive HTML documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
we make recommendations for setting up and deploying interactive HTML documentation.
```

I think this flows better when shortening like this, and making the other suggested edit above.

We consider a project well-tested if there exists a CI job, which:

- builds the source code for the project:
    - for projects with compiled extensions: using the Emscripten compiler toolchain for the `wasm32-unknown-emscripten` target into Pyodide-tagged wheels,
    - for pure Python projects: building wheels through existing build frontends such as `pip` or `pypa/build`
- subsequently, runs the entire test suite or applicable portions with these wheels installed into a Pyodide virtual environment provided with `pyodide venv`

- Additionally, this SPEC recommends that [project contacts](https://github.com/pyodide/pyodide/issues/4506) volunteer as recipe maintainers for the packages they maintain so that they can help with builds or testing issues that may occur when the Pyodide or emscripten-forge maintainers try to upgrade packages, or with usage issues that may arise when users try to use Pyodide or emscripten-forge.

#### 2. Enabling WASM builds for use in interactive documentation

> The next step is to use the added compatibility with WebAssembly by making binaries available through the appropriate pathways; i.e., through the Pyodide distribution or the emscripten-forge channel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The next step after establishing WebAssembly compatibility is to make binaries available through the appropriate pathways; i.e., through the Pyodide distribution or the emscripten-forge channel.
```

Pyodide provides an entire distribution of packages along with its runtime through the jsDelivr CDN as its package index. Packages are bundled as WebAssembly-tagged wheels, which can be installed with [`micropip`](https://github.com/pyodide/micropip/), Pyodide's in-browser package manager.

> [The `emscripten-forge` channel](https://emscripten-forge.org/) also has a growing collection of packages that support the `wasm32-unknown-emscripten` target, often mirroring Pyodide in terms of the versions of packages available, though it differs in usage:
> 
> - It is possible to use the distribution only through the JupyterLite project, unlike Pyodide, which also supports Node.js
> - The versions of Emscripten used across both are different, and therefore the ABI is, too
> - It uses `conda`-based packaging standards and file formats, rather than those for PyPI that Pyodide uses (wheels).

Reviewer: Maybe something like this, and see comment below.

```suggestion
[The `emscripten-forge` channel](https://emscripten-forge.org/) also has a growing collection of packages that support the `wasm32-unknown-emscripten` target, often mirroring Pyodide in terms of the versions of packages available. There are key differences between Pyodide and `emscripten-forge` which we will discuss further along when giving suggestions on how to choose a distribution.
```

> Therefore, if a project and its dependencies are compatible with WebAssembly as noted above, but may not yet be available via Pyodide or emscripten-forge, it is possible to add them to these distributions. This process is described in their respective documentation websites:

Reviewer: Part of my confusion I think is the use of "Therefore" here, when the preceding bullet points don't seem to imply the statement that follows. Instead they seem to be a list of disconnected facts that are not necessary at this point of the document. I think any information on the differences between Pyodide and `emscripten-forge` should go in the section 

```#### What distribution should projects choose: Pyodide or emscripten-forge?```

Author: This is hopefully addressed with a8d06b0695aca604af51fd48a0d1808356277f8d, where I've tried to address the disconnect associated with these facts and moved the facts to where they are more relevant.

JupyterLite is also best supported on more conventional platforms and browser configurations:

- For example, iOS's WASM runtime is not well supported upstream and unexpected problems may occur.

> - Earlier versions of Firefox (prior to version 138) in incognito mode does not have proper support for accessing the Emscripten file system, because service workers, which JupyterLite uses, are not supported.

Author: See `https://github.com/jupyterlite/jupyterlite/issues/1341` (intentionally not linking directly)
